a leaf comes to life
a brimstone the butter-colored fly
that may have given all butterflies
her name and the changing color of a
speckled wood chrysalis
[Music]
woodland butterflies like the white
admiral and silver washed for tillery
have declined dramatically they remind
us that habitat isn't just lost when a
building goes up or a hedgerow's ripped
out
it also disappears with neglect
the heath for tillery was known as the
woodman's friend
thriving where trees were cut down and
light flooded in
allowing its food plant common cow wheat
to grow
it was close to extinction but now
creates one of britain's biggest
butterfly spectacles
thanks to people resurrecting
traditional ways of managing the
woodland
but butterflies are also giving us vital
information
about another threat to our wildlife
and they're doing it through moments of
beauty
like this
[Music]
so
two and a half thousand kilometers from
britain's south coast
into morocco
[Music]
what he found there helped to reveal how
butterflies can benefit from climate
change
[Music]
in summer the painted lady is one of
britain's commonest butterflies
but in winter it disappears
where they go had been a mystery but
spanish scientist
constanti stefanescu found them
he'd been searching for years but at
last he'd found what he'd been looking
for
high in the atlas mountains of morocco
were hundreds of thousands of nomads
waiting for the right conditions to push
[Music]
north
constanti's discovery proved that
painted ladies travel further than
anyone had thought
it never hibernates instead
it lives its life as a restless nomad
that's always on the move
tracking the best places at the right
moments
painted lady caterpillars have simple
tastes
thistles nettles and mallows
common plants found from africa to the
arctic circle
but crucially at different times of year
instead of waiting for their plants to
grow the painted lady goes
looking for them flying wherever its
food plants are to be found
individuals can travel two and a half
thousand kilometers
from the mountains of morocco all the
way to britain
like any nomad they rarely pass an
opportunity to refuel
sugary dates from the trees or
for sale in local souks and on flowers
briefly brought to life by the slowest
moving stream
although feeding here has its own risks
[Music]
um
many painted ladies perish on their
journey
[Music]
the large blue was once extinct in
britain
but it relies on farm animals in a way
so bizarre
you couldn't make it up
meadow ants nesting in the grass may
irritate the adults
but are an unlikely asset for their
caterpillars
that's because large blues have a rather
interesting approach to parental care
their young are adopted by ants
the caterpillar mimics the sound and
smell of the ants own young
and mistaken for a mislaid ant lava
is taken back to the nest by the
foraging ant workers
but it doesn't repay the favor once
underground the caterpillar leads a
predatory life
eating the ants own larvae until one day
it's ready to change into a pupa
and eventually emerges as one of
britain's rarest butterflies
ants are vital to the butterfly but if
the grass is too long they move out
so without sheep to keep the grass short
there'd be no ants
and without the ants the large blue
would be lost
but this place is a nature reserve and
we can't turn the entire countryside
into one of those
[Music]
but in the long term we will have to
produce food sustainably
and government schemes are now
encouraging farmers to restore
intensively farmed land for wildlife
farmland that encourages butterflies is
a place of flowering meadows
and field margins buzzing with life
butterflies can bring back the wildlife
rich countryside we adore
but unless these oases are joined up the
butterflies trapped here will always be
at risk hello youtube i'm nicolette and
for today's slo-mo i've convinced i to
bring the camera along to bristol zoo to
film one of my absolute favorite
creatures
butterflies
[Music]
butterflies slap their wings around 25
times per second which is pretty speedy
what um first shot do you think we
should go for i think we should just
start with a take-off
[Music]
we got it what frame rate was this one
this was a thousand
so what's what's happening with that
abdomen then why is why is that
shaking up and down like so he's
bringing it up there yeah well
butterflies are capable of combining a
variety of
aerodynamic maneuvers to fly and they're
even inspiring scientists to develop
small flying robots based on the way
they move which is pretty cool
butterflies are quite different to birds
and planes they're actually much more
like swimmers
so they like push the air around them in
order to move through it right
so if you look at this lacewing that
we've captured here
you can see as it's taken off it's
peeling its wings apart and from the
front
and that causes the air to rush down and
it increases the force of the downward
push
and which which allows it to lift so you
can see this guy is coming in and
really throwing on the brakes or trying
to maneuver i'm not sure exactly what's
going on there you see how it gets its
wings at quite a steep angle yep
one of the ways they do this is they
create like these swirling vortices on
the edges of their wings
which is kind of like a mini whirlwind
so by doing that these whirlwinds kind
of create a push
and it enables them to again get more
lift to move with oh wow
yeah it's pretty cool pretty amazing i'm
not sure exactly what's going on there
so when he takes off kind of
leaves his legs hanging for a little bit
some studies have found that butterflies
will raise one leg in the air to kind of
do their pre-flight checks as if they're
checking the wind see if they can take
off and then yeah they've got sensors in
their feet
and once they realize the conditions are
good they can take off pretty
pretty techy little animals then yeah
[Music]
whoa that's awesome they actually look
pretty clumsy when they take off
yeah and that irregularity actually
works to their advantage
so if you think about if you slam a book
shirt like this it kind of causes a
push of air to move up and the butterfly
uses that to move down and kind of
combined with the other aerodynamic
maneuvers that it's capable of
that's what we see as a flutter and it
actually makes it much more difficult
for predators to
catch them in the wild so if you think
about if you were in the street and you
did like a combination of a harper skip
and a backflip instead of a walk it
would people would think i was mad
they would think you were mad but it
would make you much less predictable
yeah
they're not as clumsy as they might look
there's actually quite a lot of
technique too
there's a lot of technique going on
there yeah we just don't see it in real
[Music]
time
so this long appendage that we're seeing
here is called a proboscis and it's what
butterflies use to feed
so it's kind of like a modified jaw
so two segments kind of come together to
form a tube so
the main staple of a butterfly's diet is
nectar but as you can see here they also
eat fruit
and what's really interesting about
these guys is that they taste with their
feet
so that would mean i'd be tasting my
socks or something yeah pretty much
so they've got these uh these things in
their feet called chemoreceptors
and when they land on something sweet it
tells their proboscis to unroll and to
drink
wow that's incredible really cool
[Music]
so you can see with this species at the
wings of this brilliant blue color
but actually they're brown there's tiny
structures on the surface of the wing
and they're disrupting the light
frequencies so that it's only reflecting
blue light oh wow
yeah it's pretty cool
[Applause]
you